This project aims to contribute to the preservation of Alsatian, an endangered Germanic dialect spoken in the French region of Alsace, by creating and curating datasets suited for training cognate detection models.

One way to contribute to language preservation is by creating and enriching digital resources, such as dictionaries, a task that requires collecting vocabulary. This can be a difficult and time-consuming mission; however, certain NLP techniques can be used to facilitate it. Most notably, automatic cognate detection models (i.e. supervised machine learning models capable of telling if a given pair of words from two different languages are related or not) can be used to this aim by detecting cognates between a low-resource and a well-documented language. Since related words are often similar in meaning, detected cognates can be considered as potential translations, thus contributing to creation of a dictionary.

The features that cognate detection models are trained on are orthographic and pronunciation similarity of pairs of words (expressed as string similarity scores), and semantic similarity (which can be obtained using word embeddings and cosine similarity). Since Alsatian is a low-resource language and lacks pretrained word embeddings, the project opts for an approach in which the future model would be trained on orthographic and pronunciation similarity only, and guarantees semantic similarity by only pairing words that are translations of each other.

The project uses the Alsatian-German-French lexicon created by Bernhard (2014) as a reference point to add Alsatian translations to a French-German lexicon. The French-German lexicon created by Nath et al. (2022) is used to demonstrate the principle, but the scripts can be used to add Alsatian translations to any French-German lexicon. Once the translations have been added, pronunciations of all words in the dataset are generated using the Double Metaphone algorithm (Philips 2000), and orthography and pronunciation similarity scores between French-Alsatian and German-Alsatian pairs are calculated using the difflib ratio() method. In order to train a model on the created dataset, word pairs need to be annotated for cognacy (label 1 for related words and 0 for unrelated).

Dependencies to install: pandas and phonetics libraries
Instructions: Place the French-German lexicon that you wish to add Alsatian translations to in the root directory of the project in csv format. Change the file names assigned to the variable dataset (input dataset) and to the action dataset.to_csv() (output dataset) to match the names of your input file and desired output file. Run the main.py script. When the script is run with the lexicon by Nath et al.(2022), which contains 1365 French-German word pairs, it runs for about 30 minutes.

Bibliography:

Bernhard, D. (2014). Adding Dialectal Lexicalisations to Linked Open Data Resources: The Example of Alsatian. Proceedings of the Workshop on Collaboration and Computing for Under Resourced Languages in the Linked Open Data Era (CCURL 2014), 23–29. https://hal.science/hal-00966820/document

Nath, A., Mahdipour Saravani, S., Khebour, I., Mannan, S., Li, Z., & Krishnaswamy, N. (2022). A Generalized Method for Automated Multilingual Loanword Detection. In N. Calzolari, C.-R. Huang, H. Kim, J. Pustejovsky, L. Wanner, K.-S. Choi, P.-M. Ryu, H.-H. Chen, L. Donatelli, H. Ji, S. Kurohashi, P. Paggio, N. Xue, S. Kim, Y. Hahm, Z. He, T. K. Lee, E. Santus, F. Bond, & S.-H. Na (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (pp. 4996–5013). International Committee on Computational Linguistics. https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.442

Philips, L. (2000) “The double metaphone search algorithm,” C/C++ Users J., 18(6), pp. 38–43.
